The general idea is that we have a constraint surface (in the case of two circles, it's smooth, in the case of more it's not, you can see this by moving along the boundary with first one contact, and then two - Vladimir's argument) and a desired velocity field that we project onto the tangent bundle. 

This is a *holonomic* constraint problem where the constraints define the manifold itself. These contraints pass to the tangent cone naturally so that we get a system of linear constraints. The problem then reduces to projecting the desired velocity to the legal velocity. In Moreau's work on sweeping processes, I think he calls this the catching up algorithm.

JJ Moreau for sweeping processes
Melvin Leok for flows on manifolds

What was the name 

Unfortunately, in the nonsmooth case, we have tangent *cones* not just tangent spaces but the idea is similar (so are on an orbifold, and does it matter?).

I've been thinking about the geometry of the configuration space of two circles in contact. My conjecture is that it is a projective plane after modding out by translations? There should be an easier way to parameterize the problem so that we exploit the symmetry.

Does using complex numbers simplify the math / numerics?

One idea is that there is an easier way to parameter

Ultimately, when projecting onto a cone, one gets the linear system
\[

[1; G^T
G; 0]
* [v; \lambda] = [U; 0]
\]
where $U$ is the desired velocity field. I think this is a "linear complementary problem" and falls under "semidefinite programming". 

Good example: normal to a line. Dual and primal problem.

There is an iterative algorithm to solve these kinds of systems called the uzawa algorithm. Perhaps it's easier to see it in the general case of quadratic programming. There, we solve a series of unconstrained optimization problems, one problem for each $\lambda_k$ where $\lambda_k$ is a series of solutions to the dual problem (projected gradient).

The rows of the matrix $G$ describe the cone. The cone itself is then (G^T * \lambda): sort of half the *span* $G^T x$ because we have the constraint $\lambda \geq 0$. 

From a numerical point of view, the circles are nice because the constraints $\phi_{ij} = 0$ that define the manifold are really easy to compute. This means that the normal vectors (needed to compute the projection) are easy to compute (the normal cone is a linear combination of the gradients of the constraints at each point). For ellipses, I've found several papers that claim to give the distance squared between two ellipses as the root of a polynomial. My current idea is to compute the gradient of this and then change coordinates to euclidean space (chain rule). I'm having trouble getting this polynomial.

Direct Least Squares Fitting of Ellipses (Fisher): maybe the algebraic distance is a good measure?
 
The normal vectors give the directions in which to move to resolve the collision. Moving along the negative of the normals takes you closer to the constraint manifold. Another way to see it is that the normal vectors is a kind of normal cone to the tangent cone. They are complementary. It makes sense that we use the normal cone because that is what the Lagrange multiplier (dual problem) $\lambda$ represents. It tells us how much to move in the normal direction to get back to the constraint surface. 
